Tutorial: calculating and lowering churn rate (#4303)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/churn-rate.md

---
title: How to calculate and lower churn rate with PostHog
sidebar: Docs
showTitle: true
author: ['ian-vanagas']
date: 2022-09-28

> featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/actions.png

Reviewer: I've sent you a Figma invite. Shout when you're free and I'll give a quick tutorial on how to create new tutorial images.

> topics: ['trends']

Reviewer: ```suggestion
topics: ['trends', 'retention', 'lifecycle']
```

---

- **Level:** Easy 🦔
- **Estimated reading time:** 6 minutes ☕️

> The word churn once reminded people of fresh butter, now it brings thoughts of lost users and revenue to product and marketing teams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The word churn once reminded people of fresh butter, now it brings thoughts of lost users and revenue.
```

Reviewer: Flows a bit better this way

The churn rate is the percentage of users who stop an action during a certain period. It is used to understand the negative changes in usage, revenue, or other growth metrics. Understanding churn rate is key to figuring out problem areas in your product. 

In this tutorial, we’ll calculate and visualize the churn rate then use PostHog’s features of session recordings, cohorts, and actions to lower it.

> ### Prerequisites
> 
> To follow this tutorial along, you need to have:
> 
> 1. **[Deployed PostHog](https://posthog.com/docs/deployment)**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites

To follow this tutorial along, you need to have:

1. **[Deployed PostHog](https://posthog.com/docs/deployment)**.
```

I feel like we can drop this section. I wouldn't consider it mandatory for all tutorials.

> ## Calculating churn rate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1: Calculating churn rate
```

> ## Calculating churn rate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1: Calculating churn rate
```

Adding this to main headings just to make it slightly easier to scan

> To calculate churn rate, first, you must define what ended or stopped. For subscription-based businesses, this could be monthly recurring revenue attributable to a subscriber. For a customer success or sales team, it could be organizations usage. For a product team, it might be product usage events by a user. For this tutorial, this product usage is what we’ll focus on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To calculate churn rate, first, you must define what ended or stopped. For subscription-based businesses, this could be monthly recurring revenue attributable to a subscriber. For a customer success or sales team, it could be organization usage. For a product team, it might be product usage events by a user. We'll focus on product usage for this tutorial.
```

> To calculate product usage churn, we must have a group of users, events from usage they are triggering, and a time period. We can look back (however long your time period is) to check the total number of users triggering events and compare it to the number triggering events now. Our churn rate is the number of users who stopped divided by the total number of users at the beginning of the period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To calculate product usage churn, we need a group of users, events from usage they are triggering, and a time period. We can look back (however long your time period is) to check the total number of users triggering events and compare it to the number triggering events now. Our churn rate is the number of users who stopped divided by the total number of users at the beginning of the period.
```

> If we had 100 users who used triggered events for a feature at the beginning of the period, and 80 who were continuing to trigger events it at the end, we’d have a churn rate of 20% because (100 - 80) / 100 * 100 = 20%

Better yet, we can visualize and refine this calculation. PostHog has tools, like retention and lifecycle charts, that help you understand churn rate and see its changes over time.

> ## Visualizing churn rate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2: Visualizing churn rate
```

To start visualizing churn rate, you can set up a retention funnel for users completing an action or event, then see how many continue their usage. The action or event you choose could be something like an autocapture of a pageview, an event capture you’ve written into your code or a combination of events (an action) that define feature usage. For us, we’ll set up a retention chart for unique users who completed the event `downloaded_file` over the last 8 weeks. 

![Retention chart](../images/tutorials/churn-rate/retention-chart.png)

> We can calculate our weekly churn and total churn by comparing our initial cohort size with the percentage of users remaining. For example, if we care about weekly churn, we can compare Week 0 and Week 1. If we care about churn across the entire period, we can compare Week 0 and Week 8. To learn more about retention charts, check out our [product manual](https://posthog.com/manual/retention).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can calculate our weekly churn and total churn by comparing our initial cohort size with the percentage of users remaining. For example, if we care about weekly churn, we can compare Week 0 and Week 1. If we care about churn across the entire period, we can compare Week 0 and Week 8. To learn more about retention charts, check out our [product manual](/manual/retention).
```

We use relative paths for internal links as well. Not sure how important this actually is, but I'm told it's best practice so 🤷!

Author: ahh right

### Lifecycle charts

Another way to visualize churn is through lifecycle charts. Lifecycle charts show us, in a time period, how many users:

- do an event for the first time
- returned to do that event
- didn’t do the event
- resurrect to do the event after not doing it in the previous period

The dormant users are the ones who churned. Comparing them with the ones who did the event (new, returning, or resurrected) can give you the churn rate for that event or action.

![Lifecycle chart](../images/tutorials/churn-rate/lifecycle-chart.png)

Once set up, we can click on the dormant part of the chart to get a list of dormant (churned) users. We can see user properties and, more importantly, session recordings for these users. This helps us lower churn in the next section.

> You can learn more about lifecycle charts in our [product manual](https://posthog.com/manual/lifecycle). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about lifecycle charts in our [product manual](/manual/lifecycle). 
```

> ## Lowering churn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Lowering churn
```

Now that we calculated and visualized the churn rate in our product, we can figure out ways to lower it. Being an all-in-one product OS, PostHog has tools to help you with this, and they connect to your data and the work you’ve already done.

### Session recordings

First on this list is session recordings. From any of the visualizations, we can get a list of users who churned at specific times. Clicking on the charts we created earlier in this tutorial gives us a list of users. We can check this list for recordings of recent sessions of churned users.

> Once we find a session recording from a churned user, we can watch their actions leading up to them churning. We might discover, for example, that the pricing page confuses users or that they can’t set up a key feature. We can use this information to improve these problem areas (check out [experiments](https://posthog.com/manual/experimentation)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we find a session recording from a churned user, we can watch their actions leading up to them churning. We might discover, for example, that the pricing page confuses users or that they can’t set up a key feature. We can use this information to improve these problem areas (check out [experiments](/manual/experimentation)).
```

> ### Cohorts

Reviewer: There's actually an easier way to do this, though we should explain both. You can create a cohort directly from the list of persons generated when you click on the result of an insight. 

![Screenshot 2022-09-29 at 12 29 02](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/92976667/193020128-19eeeca4-1dcb-497e-82a0-3d833604f151.png)

Author: Ahh yeah, added this.

On top of making improvements to problem areas, we can monitor users at high risk to churn. To do this, we can set up a cohort.

To set up a cohort, go to the cohort page and create filters that match the high churn risk users. In our example, the filters are not completing a key event (uploading a file) in the last 30 days and stopping downloading files in the last 15 days (but having done so before).

![Churn risk cohort](../images/tutorials/churn-rate/churn-risk-cohort.png)

Once saved, this provides us with a dynamic list of “high churn risk” users which we can monitor and use in other areas of PostHog.

### Actions

> One way we can use a cohort is by combining it with an event to create an action. For example, we can set up an action to trigger when a user in our high churn risk cohort visits a help page. Using [webhooks](https://posthog.com/docs/integrate/webhooks/message-formatting), we can bring these actions into [Slack](https://posthog.com/docs/integrate/webhooks/slack) or wherever our sales or customer success team spends their time to have them reach out to users when the risk action is triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way we can use a cohort is by combining it with an event to create an action. For example, we can set up an action to trigger when a user in our high churn risk cohort visits a help page. Using [webhooks](https://posthog.com/docs/integrate/webhooks/message-formatting), we can bring these actions into [Slack](https://posthog.com/docs/integrate/webhooks/slack), or wherever our sales or customer success team spends their time to have them reach out to users when the risk action is triggered.
```

> One way we can use a cohort is by combining it with an event to create an action. For example, we can set up an action to trigger when a user in our high churn risk cohort visits a help page. Using [webhooks](https://posthog.com/docs/integrate/webhooks/message-formatting), we can bring these actions into [Slack](https://posthog.com/docs/integrate/webhooks/slack) or wherever our sales or customer success team spends their time to have them reach out to users when the risk action is triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way we can use a cohort is by combining it with an event to create an action. For example, we can set up an action to trigger when a user in our high churn risk cohort visits a help page. Using [webhooks](/docs/integrate/webhooks/message-formatting), we can bring these actions into [Slack](/docs/integrate/webhooks/slack) or wherever our sales or customer success team spends their time to have them reach out to users when the risk action is triggered.
```

![Churn risk action](../images/tutorials/churn-rate/churn-risk-action.png)

> Now we’ve targeted churn on multiple fronts, both by understanding what users are doing before they churn with session recordings and by monitoring users with cohorts and actions. We’ve begun to set up the tools for lowering churn. With continued improvement and experimentation, you’ll hopefully see improvements in your churn rate and the visualizations you’ve set up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we’ve targeted churn on multiple fronts, both by understanding what users are doing before they churn with session recordings and by monitoring users with cohorts and actions. We’ve begun to set up the tools for lowering churn. With continued improvement and experimentation, you’ll hopefully see improvements in your churn rate and the visualizations you’ve set up.

### Further reading

- [How to build, analyze and optimize conversion funnels in PostHog](/tutorials/funnels)
- [The most useful B2B SaaS product metrics](/blog/b2b-saas-product-metrics)

<NewsletterTutorial compact/>
```

Reviewer: Always good to add some links at the end both for UX and SEO. Also, newsletter signup. :D
